FAR 1 Unit Outline
1
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
FAR 1
Unit Outline
Module 1—Balance Sheet, Income Statement, and Comprehensive Income
Balance Sheet
 Under U.S. GAAP, entities may present a classified balance sheet that distinguishes current and noncurrent
assets and liabilities. When appropriate, a balance sheet based on liquidity is also
permissible. Review the terminology and be able to recognize a classified balance sheet.
Uses of the Income Statement and Terminology
 The purpose of the income statement is to provide information about the uses of funds in the income
process (i.e., expenses), the uses of funds that will never be used to earn income (i.e., losses), the
sources of funds created by those expenses (i.e., revenues), and the sources of funds not associated
with the earnings process (i.e., gains).
 Know the difference between expired and unexpired costs and also the difference between the gross
concept and the net concept.
Income From Continuing Operations
 Know the difference between a multiple-step income statement and a single-step income statement.
The multiple-step income statement reports revenues and expenses separately from nonoperating
revenues and expenses and other gains and losses. In the single-step presentation of income from
continuing operations, total expenses (including income tax expenses) are subtracted from total
revenues; thus, the income statement has a single step.
Income From Discontinued Operations
 Accounting for discontinued operations can consist of gain/loss on current operations, gain/loss on
sale, and impairment loss. Discontinued operations are shown net of tax. Any of these must be
reported as part of discontinued operations in the year incurred.
 The results of operations of a component of an entity or a group of components of an entity, or a
business or nonprofit activity, will be reported in discontinued operations if it has been disposed of or
is classified as "held for sale."
 The disposal must represent a strategic shift that has or will have a major effect on an entity's
operations and financial results to be reported as a discontinued operation.
Foreign Currency Transactions
 Foreign currency transactions require adjusting the receivable or the payable at year-end for changes
in the dollar equivalent of the foreign currency-denominated transaction since the transaction date. An
additional gain or loss is reported when the transaction is settled in the foreign currency.
Comprehensive Income
 Comprehensive income includes all changes in owner's equity other than transactions with owners.
The formula shows that comprehensive income must include net income plus/minus other changes in
owner's equity not resulting from transactions with owners. These other changes are known as other
comprehensive income items.
 Other comprehensive income items are revenues, expenses, gains, or losses that are included in
comprehensive income but excluded from net income under U.S. GAAP.
 The mnemonic PUFI represents the five commonly tested sources of other comprehensive income.
• Pension adjustments
• Unrealized gains and losses on AFS debt securities and hedges
FAR 1 Unit Outline
2
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
• Foreign currency translation items
• Instrument-specific credit risk
 Accumulated other comprehensive income is the cumulative sum of all of the individual components
of other comprehensive income. Accumulated other comprehensive income is an owner's equity item.
 U.S. GAAP allows the statement of comprehensive income to be presented using the onestatement
approach (statement of income and comprehensive income) or the two-statement
approach (statement of income immediately followed by a separate statement of comprehensive
income).
 Components of other comprehensive income may be reported either net of tax or before related tax
effects, with one amount shown for the aggregate income tax expense or benefit related to the total of
other comprehensive income items.
Module 2—Earnings per Share and Public Company Reporting Topics
Earnings per Share Overview
 An entity's capital structure determines the manner in which earnings per share (EPS) are disclosed
on the income statement.
Simple Capital Structure (Report Basic EPS Only)
 An entity that issues only common stock (no other securities that can be converted to common stock)
has a simple capital structure.
 Basic EPS assumes no potentially dilutive securities. Basic EPS divides income available for
common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding.
Complex Capital Structure (Report Basic and Diluted EPS)
 An entity has a complex capital structure when it has securities that can be potentially converted to
common stock and would therefore dilute or reduce EPS.
 Diluted EPS employs the "if converted" and/or “treasury stock” methods to recompute EPS as it
would be if any dilutive securities such as convertible bonds or preferred stock, rights, warrants, or
options were exercised. Antidilutive securities are not considered.
 Preferred stock, especially cumulative issues, causes calculation difficulties, as preferred claims are
not available for common shareholders and preferred dividends do not reduce net income.
 Contingent shares, if dilutive, are part of the basic EPS calculation if all conditions for issuance are met.
Earnings per Share Disclosures
 Basic and diluted EPS are disclosed by the income statement component for a proper presentation.
SEC Reporting Requirements
 Form 10-K must be filed annually by U.S. registered companies (issuers). The filing deadline for Form
10-K is 60 days after the end of the fiscal year for large accelerated filers; 75 days after the end of the
fiscal year for accelerated filers; and 90 days after the end of the fiscal year for all other registrants.
This form contains financial disclosures, including a summary of financial data, management's
discussion and analysis (MD&A), and audited financial statements prepared using U.S. GAAP.
 Form 10-Q must be filed quarterly by U.S. registered companies (issuers). The filing deadline for
Form 10-Q is 40 days after the end of the fiscal quarter for large accelerated filers and accelerated
filers, and 45 days after the end of the fiscal quarter for all other registrants. This form contains
unaudited financial statements prepared using U.S. GAAP, interim period MD&A, and certain
disclosures.
 Form 8-K is filed by U.S. registered companies to disclose changes whenever a material event occurs.
FAR 1 Unit Outline
3
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Module 3—Stockholders' Equity: Part 1
Overview
 Stockholders' (owner's) equity includes five major components: 1) capital stock; 2) additional paid-in
capital; 3) retained earnings or deficit; 4) accumulated other comprehensive income; and 5) treasury
stock. When an entity presents consolidated financial statements, any noncontrolling interest must be
shown in equity.
Capital Stock (Legal Capital)
 Capital stock includes these terms: authorized, issued, and outstanding. Treasury stock is issued but
not outstanding.
 Common shareholders' equity equals total stockholders' equity reduced for the claims of preferred
shareholders.
 Book value per share is the common shareholders' equity divided by the number of common shares
outstanding at year-end.
 Preferred shares are "first in line" before common shareholders for dividends and payment in
liquidation. Preferred stock may also be cumulative, participating, or convertible. Mandatorily
redeemable preferred stock is reported as a liability because it has a maturity date, like other debt
instruments.
Additional Paid-in Capital
 Additional paid-in capital can come from several sources in addition to any amount received above
the par value of shares issued.
Retained Earnings
 Retained earnings can be increased or decreased by many events, including: income, losses, cash
dividends, property dividends, stock dividends, prior period adjustments, cumulative effects of
changes in accounting principles, and quasi-reorganizations.
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
 Accumulated other comprehensive income is an equity account into which the components of other
comprehensive income flow.
Treasury Stock
 Treasury stock may be accounted for by the cost method or the legal (par value) method. The
candidate should review journal entry examples in the text under the cost method and par value
method, including the retirement of treasury stock.
 Donated shares result in a credit to contributed capital.
Module 4—Stockholders' Equity: Part 2
Accounting for a Stock Issuance (to Nonemployees)
 Stock subscriptions are contracts to buy a stock at a future date.
 Stock rights provide existing shareholders with the opportunity to buy additional shares and do not
affect equity until exercised.
Distributions to Shareholders
 Dividends declared reduce retained earnings on the declaration date.
 Property dividends are recorded at their fair value at the declaration date. Gain or loss is recognized
on that date.
FAR 1 Unit Outline
4
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
 Stock dividends occur in two sizes: small and large. The "break point" is 20 to 25 percent of
outstanding common stock. Small stock dividends tend to be on the exam more often. Small stock
dividends are recorded at fair value on the declaration date. Large stock dividends are recorded at
par value.
 Stock splits do not require a journal entry and total book value of common stock is unchanged.
Statement of Changes in Shareholders' Equity
 The statement of changes in shareholders' equity provides specific information about changes in a
company's primary equity components for a stipulated period(s).
FAR 2 Unit Outline
1
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
FAR 2
Unit Outline
Module 1—Revenue Recognition Introduction
Five-Step Approach to Revenue Recognition
 Step 1—Identify the Contract With the Customer.
Contracts are agreements between parties that create enforceable rights or obligations. In order for
revenue to be recognized, a contract must: be approved by all parties, contain identifiable rights for
each party and payment terms, have commercial substance, and involve probable likelihood that the
entity will collect substantially all consideration owed. Contracts may be combined into a single
contract and are potentially modified when the price and/or scope changes.
 Step 2—Identify the Separate Performance Obligations in the Contract.
A performance obligation is a promise to transfer either a good or service to a customer. The transfer
may either be distinct or a series of substantially similar goods/services. To be distinct, the promise
must be separately identifiable from other goods/services within the contract, and the benefit must be
available to the customer independently or when combined with the customer's own resources.
 Step 3—Determine the Transaction Price.
The transaction price is the amount of consideration that an entity is entitled to receive in exchange
for transferring goods and/or services to a customer. If applicable, variable consideration, significant
financing, noncash considerations, and consideration payable to the customer should be factored into
the transaction price.
 Step 4—Allocate the Transaction Price to the Separate Performance Obligations.
If a contract contains more than one performance obligation, the overall transaction price will need to
be allocated to each separate obligation based on the amount of the expected, standalone
consideration applicable to each unique obligation. Discounts, variable consideration, and transaction
price changes should all be factored into the allocation process.
 Step 5—Recognize Revenue When or as the Entity Satisfies Each Performance Obligation.
Revenue is recognized when the performance obligation is satisfied through transferring the
good/service to the customer (who obtains control). Satisfaction can occur over time (measured using
output or input methods) or at a point in time.
Presentation
 A contract asset is booked when the entity has a right to consideration in exchange for
goods/services transferred to the customer prior to actual payment. A contract liability is booked when
an entity has an obligation to transfer goods/services when the customer has already paid prior to
performance.
Module 2—Accounting Changes and Error Corrections
Changes in Accounting Estimate (Prospective Application)
 Changes in estimates, such as the useful life of a plant asset, are incorporated into the accounting
records for the current and future periods (prospectively). No adjustment of prior financial statements
is required.
 A change in depreciation method is a change in accounting principle that is inseparable from a
change in estimate and is accounted for as a change in estimate.
FAR 2 Unit Outline
2
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Changes in Accounting Principle (Retrospective Application)
 Change in principle (or method) involves switching from one acceptable method to another. The
cumulative effect is the change in retained earnings that results from restating prior years from the
"old" method to the "new" method at the beginning of the earliest year presented.
 The cumulative effect is reported as an adjustment to beginning retained earnings, net of tax, in the
statement of retained earnings.
 Change in Accounting Principle Exception—When it is impracticable to estimate the change in
retained earnings that would result from restating the prior year's financial statements, the change in
method is applied prospectively (like changes in estimate). In this case, no restatement of the prior
years' presentation occurs, and there is no cumulative effect reported in the statement of retained
earnings (e.g., changing to U.S. GAAP LIFO from any other inventory method).
Changes in Accounting Entity (Retrospective Application)
 Changes in entity require a restatement of the prior years' financial statements to conform with the
new accounting entity when the prior financials are presented comparatively.
Error Correction (Prior Period Adjustment)
 Error corrections are reported net of tax in the statement of retained earnings.
Module 3—Adjusting Journal Entries
Matching Revenues and Related Expenses
 Accrual basis accounting matches revenues with expenses. In order to properly match revenues with
expenses in the periods in which they occur, it is sometimes necessary to defer or accrue revenues
or expenses.
Adjusting Journal Entries
 If revenue has been deferred, the company must calculate the amount of revenue that can be
recognized through year-end and make the appropriate adjusting journal entry.
 If expenses have been deferred (prepaid), the company must calculate the amount of expenses that
have been incurred through year-end and make the appropriate adjusting journal entry.
 An entity must assess whether the performance obligation has been met and revenue can be
recognized prior to the cash being received. If so, revenues must be accrued by recording a
receivable.
 An entity must also assess whether expenses have been incurred prior to the cash being paid. If so,
expenses must be accrued by recording accrued liabilities, accounts payable, or other payables (e.g.,
wages payable).
 In some instances, an entity may record receipts to a revenue/expense account when they should
have been recorded to an asset/liability account. An adjusting entry may be required to ensure that
the financial statements are in accordance with the accrual basis of accounting.
 Rules for adjusting journal entries are as follows:
• Adjusting journal entries must be recorded by the end of the entity's fiscal year before the
preparation of the financial statements.
• Adjusting journal entries never involve the cash account.
• All adjusting journal entries will hit one income statement account and one balance sheet account.
FAR 2 Unit Outline
3
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Module 4—Notes to Financial Statements
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
 The Summary of Significant Accounting Policies reflects the methods and policies employed by the firm.
Remaining Notes to the Financial Statements
 The remaining notes contain all other information relevant to decision makers. These notes are used
to disclose facts not presented in either the body of the financial statements or in the Summary of
Significant Accounting Policies.
 Examples of remaining notes include material information regarding inventory, PP&E, and other
significant asset/liability balances; changes in stockholders' equity; fair value estimates; contingency
losses; contractual obligations; pension plan descriptions; segment reporting; subsequent events; and
changes in accounting principles or implementation of new accounting standards updates.
Disclosure of Risks and Uncertainties
 U.S. GAAP requires the disclosure of risks and uncertainties existing at the date(s) of the financial
statements in the following areas: nature of operations, use of estimates in the preparation of financial
statements, certain significant estimates, and current vulnerability due to certain concentrations.
Module 5—Subsequent Events
Definition of a Subsequent Event
 A subsequent event is an event or transaction that occurs after the balance sheet date but before the
financial statements are issued or are available to be issued.
 Recognized subsequent events provide additional information about conditions that existed at the
balance sheet date. Entities must recognize the effects of all recognized subsequent events in the
financial statements.
 Nonrecognized subsequent events provide information about conditions that occurred after the
balance sheet date and did not exist at the balance sheet date. Entities should not include
nonrecognized subsequent events in the financial statements.
Subsequent Evaluation Period
 An entity that files financial statements with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) must
evaluate subsequent events through the date that the financial statements are issued.
 All other entities must evaluate subsequent events through the date that the financial statements are
available to be issued.
Reissuance of Financial Statements
 When an entity reissues its financial statements, the entity should not recognize events that occurred
between the date the original financial statements were issued or available to be issued and the date
that the financial statements were reissued unless an adjustment is required by GAAP or other
regulatory requirements.
Revised Financial Statements
 Revised financial statements are considered reissued financial statements.
Module 6—Fair Value Measurements
Fair Value Overview
 Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly
transaction between market participants in the principal (or most advantageous) market at the
measurement date under current market conditions.
FAR 2 Unit Outline
4
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Fair Value Terminology
 The most advantageous market is the market with the best price for the asset (maximizes selling price
of the asset) or liability (minimizes payment to transfer liability) after considering transaction costs.
Fair Value Measurement Framework
 Entities can use the market approach, the cost approach, the income approach, or a combination of
these approaches when measuring the fair value of an asset or liability.
 The fair value hierarchy prioritizes the inputs used in the market, cost, and income valuation
techniques. Level 1 inputs have the highest priority, and Level 3 inputs have the lowest priority.
Fair Value Disclosures
 The objective of fair value disclosures is to provide users of financial statements with information
about assets and liabilities measured at fair value, including:
• the valuation techniques and inputs the entity uses to arrive at its measures of fair value,
including judgments and assumptions that the entity makes;
• the uncertainty in the fair value measurements as of the reporting date; and
• how changes in fair value measurements affect the entity's performance and cash flows.
Exceptions to Fair Value Measurement
 The entity is exempt from the fair value measurement requirement when:
• it is not practical to measure fair value;
• fair value cannot be reasonably determined; or
• fair value cannot be measured with sufficient reliability.
Module 7—Special Purpose Frameworks
Special Purpose Frameworks
 Other financial statement presentations include OCBOA (other comprehensive basis of accounting)
financial statements and personal financial statements. OCBOA presentations include financial
statements prepared using the cash basis, the modified cash basis, and the income tax basis.
Converting Cash Basis Financial Statements to the Accrual Basis
 Many small businesses use the cash basis or modified cash basis of accounting to account for dayto-
day operations. In certain circumstances (e.g., to obtain a loan from a bank, to report to owners, or
to go public), such entities may be required to convert cash basis financial statements to accrual
basis financial statements.
 In order to make this conversion, it is essential to understand the differences between cash basis and
accrual basis accounting.
Cash Basis Accrual Basis
Revenue recognition Cash received Realized or realizable and earned
Expense recognition Cash paid Incurred/owed/benefit received
FAR 2 Unit Outline
5
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Module 8—Ratio and Variance Analysis
Ratio Analysis Overview
 Ratios are financial indicators that distill relevant information about a business entity by quantifying
the relationship among selected items on the financial statements. An entity's ratios may be
compared with ratios of a different period of that entity. An entity's ratios may also be compared with
competitor ratios and industry ratios. These comparative analyses identify trends that may be
important to investors, lenders, and other interested parties.
Profitability Ratios
 Profitability ratios are measures of the success or failure of an enterprise for a given time period.
Liquidity Ratios
 Liquidity ratios are measures of a firm's short-term ability to pay maturing obligations.
Solvency Ratios
 Solvency ratios are measures of security or protection for long-term creditors/investors.
Performance Metrics
 Performance metrics are measures used to evaluate operating performance and elements of a
company’s stock performance from the perspective of current and potential investors.
Limitations of Ratios
 Although ratios are easy to compute, they depend entirely on the reliability of the data on which they
are based (e.g., estimates, historical costs, fair value, etc.). Additional information is also valuable
when analyzing a company.
Actual vs. Plan
 Performing a budget variance analysis involves comparing actual results with the annual business
plan to determine favorable and unfavorable variances.
FAR 3 Unit Outline
1
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
FAR 3
Unit Outline
Module 1—Cash and Cash Equivalents
Definition and Classifications
 Cash must be readily available. Cash equivalents are highly liquid investment securities with maturity
dates within 90 days of the date purchased. The only occasion when the time to maturity matters is at
the purchase date.
 Restricted cash must be segregated from other cash.
Bank Reconciliations
 Bank reconciliations reconcile ending balances per bank and books, with adding and subtracting
items causing differences between the two balances. Outstanding items are adjustments on the bank
side and adjusting journal entry information provides adjustments on the book side.
Module 2—Trade Receivables
Accounts Receivable
 Valuing accounts receivable requires reductions for bad debts, sales returns and allowances, and
sales discounts. This results in a net accounts receivable balance approximating the cash expected
to be collected.
 Sales discounts are offered to encourage earlier payment by customers. Sales and related
receivables can be recorded using either the gross method or the theoretically preferred net method.
 Trade discounts are applied sequentially, and receivables are recorded net of any trade discount.
 Accounts receivable are presented on the balance sheet at the net realizable value. Estimating
uncollectible accounts receivable includes the following methods:
• Direct write-off method: used for tax; it is not GAAP.
• The allowance method is GAAP. The allowance for uncollectible accounts is a contra-asset. In
the balance sheet approach (percent of ending A/R and aging method), the ending balance in the
allowance account must equal an amount determined by an analysis of the A/R schedule.
• In the allowance method, writing off an account receivable involves debiting the allowance and
crediting accounts receivable.
• When collecting an account previously written off, restore the account receivable and the
allowance and then record the collection in the normal way.
 Factoring receivables can be done with or without recourse. With recourse means that the transferor
retains the risk of uncollectibility. Factoring without recourse is a sale of the receivable, and the
assignee assumes the risk of loss.
Notes Receivable
 Discounting a note receivable involves transferring the note to a third party, usually for cash. This
transfer can be with or without recourse. If done with recourse, a contingent liability is created for the
transferor.
 Determining the proceeds to be received requires deducting the banker's discount (interest) from the
maturity value of the note. The discount is calculated using maturity value, discount rate, and time left
to maturity.
FAR 3 Unit Outline
2
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Module 3—Inventory
Types of Inventories
 There are four types of inventory: retail inventory, raw materials inventory, work-in-process inventory,
and finished goods inventory.
Goods and Materials to Be Included in Inventory
 All inventories owned by an entity should be included in the inventory account. FOB shipping terms
can be used to establish when a purchase or sale has occurred.
 Consigned goods belong to the consignor.
Valuation of Inventory
 Inventory account valuations should include all the costs necessary to make the inventory ready for
the intended use (sale).
 Lower-of-cost-or-market and lower-of-cost-or-net-realizable-value are departures from the cost basis
caused by a decline in the inventory's utility.
 Under the U.S. GAAP lower-of-cost-or-market (LCM) method, when the inventory's replacement cost
is lower than the cost basis, a current period inventory write-down may be indicated based on the
relationship between replacement cost and the market ceiling and floor. LCM is used for inventory
that is costed using LIFO or the retail inventory method.
 Under the U.S. GAAP LCM method, when an inventory's net realizable value (Net sales price – Costs
to complete and dispose) is lower than the cost basis, a current period inventory write-down should
be recorded. Under U.S. GAAP, lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value is used for all inventory that is
not costed using LIFO or the retail inventory method.
Periodic Inventory System vs. Perpetual Inventory System
 Perpetual and periodic inventory systems control how an entity accounts for purchases and sales of
inventory.
 The perpetual system records purchases with a debit to inventory. The periodic system records
purchases with a debit to purchases.
 The perpetual system records sales of inventory in two journal entries. The periodic system only
records the receivable and revenue at the time of sale. The inventory account is updated at the end of
the period after taking a physical count.
Primary Inventory Cost Flow Assumptions
 Inventory methods under U.S. GAAP include: first in, first out (FIFO); last in, first out (LIFO); and
weighted average. These methods may apply to both periodic and perpetual systems.
 Because FIFO values inventory at the most recent costs, it will generally result in the highest ending
inventory, the lowest cost of goods sold, and the highest net income compared to other methods in a
period of rising prices.
 LIFO generally results in the lowest ending inventory, the highest cost of goods sold, and the lowest
net income compared to other methods in a period of rising prices.
 A weighted average is called a "moving average" in a perpetual inventory system.
FAR 3 Unit Outline
3
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Gross Profit Method
 The gross profit and retail inventory methods attempt to estimate ending inventory based on the
historical gross profit or cost complement percentage.
Firm Purchase Commitments
 Firm purchase commitments require current loss recognition if the contracted price exceeds the
market price and if it is expected that losses will occur when the purchase is actually made.
Module 4—PP&E: Cost Basis
Property, Plant, and Equipment
 Property, plant, and equipment are assets acquired for use in operations, possess physical
substance, are long-term in nature, and are subject to depreciation.
Valuation of Fixed Assets
 Under U.S. GAAP, fixed assets are valued at historical cost to acquire and put into use with few
exceptions.
 Donated fixed assets are recorded at fair value and a gain or revenue is recognized equal to that value.
Property
 Land should be recorded to reflect all the costs necessary to make the land ready for its intended
use. Land is not depreciated.
 Land improvements have finite lives and should be depreciated.
Plant
 For the "basket purchase" of land and buildings, allocate the purchase price based on the ratio of the
appraised value of individual items.
Equipment
 Ordinary repairs that maintain the equipment should be expensed. Extraordinary repairs, such as
overhauls or major replacements, should be capitalized.
Fixed Assets Constructed by a Company
 Constructed fixed assets should include capitalized interest on weighted average expenditures
incurred during the construction period.
Module 5—PP&E: Depreciation, Disposal, and Impairment
Overview
 Physical depreciation is related to an asset's deterioration and wear over time. Functional
depreciation arises from the obsolescence or inadequacy of the asset to perform efficiently.
Composite Depreciation and Component Depreciation
 Under the component depreciation method, separate significant components of a fixed asset with
different lives should be recorded and depreciated separately. The carrying amount of parts or
components that are replaced should be derecognized.
 The composite and group depreciation methods depreciate an entire class of assets over a single life.
FAR 3 Unit Outline
4
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Basic Depreciation Methods
 The straight-line, sum-of-the-years'-digits, and declining balance methods are the three major
methods of depreciation.
 The units-of-production method is similar to the straight-line method except that the life is defined in
the number of units expected to be produced.
Disposals
 The candidate should be familiar with the journal entries for disposals of fixed assets including sale,
write-off of fully depreciated asset, and permanent impairment.
Disclosure
 Allowances for depreciation and depletion should be deducted from the specific asset reported on the
balance sheet.
Depletion
 Depletion is similar to the units-of-production method, except the former is applied to "wasting"
assets. Restoration costs should be included in the depletion base.
Impairment of Property, Plant, and Equipment
 Fixed asset impairment contains two steps:
• Step 1—test for recoverability: If the sum of undiscounted expected future cash flows is less than
the carrying amount, an impairment loss needs to be recognized (go to Step 2).
• Step 2—calculate impairment loss: The impairment loss is the amount by which the carrying
amount exceeds the fair value of the asset.
 If the impaired asset is held for use, the asset is written down to fair value, and subsequent
depreciation is based on that fair value. If the fair value were to subsequently "rebound," no
restoration would be permitted.
 If the asset is held for disposal, depreciation is discontinued. If the fair value were to partially recover
prior to sale, a restoration would be permitted.
Module 6—Intangibles with Finite Lives
Intangible Assets
 Intangible assets are long-lived legal rights and competitive advantages developed or acquired by a
business enterprise, including patents, copyrights, trademarks, and goodwill.
 Purchased identifiable intangible assets should be recorded at cost plus additional expenditures
necessary to purchase.
 Identifiable intangibles with finite lives are amortized over the shorter of the estimated economic life
and the legal life.
 Intangible assets with finite useful lives are tested for impairment using a two-step impairment test
whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
Purchased Software and Cloud Computing
 Software purchased for use by an organization is recorded as an intangible asset and amortized over
the shorter of the legal life or economic life.
 Cloud computing arrangements (CCA) involve paying a vendor a fee in exchange for the right to use
software over the internet. Certain implementation costs incurred during the application development
phase may be capitalized and amortized over the term of the hosting arrangement, while all other
costs are expensed as incurred.
FAR 3 Unit Outline
5
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Franchisee Accounting
 The present value of the amount paid or to be paid by a franchisee (the initial franchise fee) is
recorded as an intangible asset on the balance sheet and amortized over the expected period of
benefit of the franchise.
Start-up Costs
 In financial accounting, start-up costs are expensed as incurred (note: tax rules permit these costs to
be capitalized).
FAR 4 Unit Outline
1
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
FAR 4
Unit Outline
Module 1—Payables and Accrued Liabilities
Overview
 Liabilities are probable future sacrifices of economic benefits arising from the present obligations
of an entity to transfer assets or provide services to other entities in the future as a result of past
transactions or events. Liabilities must be identified as current or non-current for financial
reporting purposes. Current liabilities are obligations with maturities within one year or within the
operating cycle, whichever is longer. Current liabilities are valued at their settlement values or
net realizable values.
 Trade accounts payable are amounts owed for goods, raw materials, and supplies that are not
evidenced by a promissory note. Purchases of goods and services on credit are usually determinable
as to the amounts due and the due date. Cash discounts associated with accounts payable can be
anticipated and journalized. The purchase may be recorded gross or net.
 Trade notes payable are formal, written promises to pay on a certain date and arise from the
purchase of goods, supplies, or services. Trade notes payable may include a stated interest rate.
 Short-term and long-term debt instruments with a stated interest rate whose payment date does not
coincide with the fiscal year-end will result in an interest payable balance at year-end. The amount
accrued should represent the interest expense incurred that has not been paid in cash as of the
balance sheet date.
 Debt instruments may be set up such that periodic principal payments are made during the life of the
borrowing. In this case, the principal due within the next year (or operating cycle) will be classified as
a current liability.
 Accrued liabilities relate to expenses incurred that have not been paid in cash at the financial
statement date (such as wages, utilities, rent, etc.).
 Taxes payable may include property, sales, and income taxes due but not yet paid.
 Unemployment taxes and the employer's share of payroll taxes (e.g., Social Security and Medicare)
should be accrued by the employer as an expense. The liability will not be liquidated until the
amounts are remitted to the appropriate taxing authority. Payroll deductions for Social Security,
Medicare, and income taxes are withheld from employees out of the gross pay of their paychecks.
These deductions are the responsibility of the employee and are therefore not recorded as an
expense but are credited to a payable account until remitted.
 Accrued vacation is recorded in the year earned if certain conditions are met.
 Self-insurance liabilities occur when an entity is liable for the risk they choose to bear themselves
rather than obtaining third-party insurance.
Exit or Disposal Activities
 A liability must be recognized for the costs associated with an exit or disposal activity. These costs
include involuntary employee termination benefits; costs to terminate a contract that is not a capital
lease; and other costs associated with exit or disposal activities, including costs to consolidate
facilities or relocate employees.
FAR 4 Unit Outline
2
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Asset Retirement Obligations
 An asset retirement obligation is a legal obligation associated with the retirement of a tangible,
long-lived asset that results from the acquisition, construction, or development and/or normal
operation of a long-lived asset, except for certain lease obligations (minimum lease payment and
contingent rentals).
 When an asset retirement obligation exists and qualifies for recognition, an entity records an asset
(ARC) and a liability (ARO) on the balance sheet equal to the fair value of the asset retirement
obligation if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. Fair value is generally equal to the
present value of the future obligations.
 In subsequent periods after the initial measurement, the ARO liability is adjusted for accretion
expense due to the passage of time, and depreciation expense is recognized on the ARC asset.
Module 2—Contingencies and Commitments
Definition of Contingencies
 Contingencies are existing conditions whose outcomes depend on some future event or occurrence.
The three categories of contingencies are probable, reasonably possible, and remote.
 A loss contingency involves a possible future loss whose existence is proved by subsequent events.
 A gain contingency is a claim or right to receive assets whose existence is uncertain but may become
valid upon the occurrence of future events.
Recognition and Measurement of Gain Contingencies
 Gain contingencies that are probable are not accrued but are disclosed.
Recognition and Measurement of Loss Contingencies
 Loss contingencies that are probable and can be reasonably estimated must be accrued. If a range of
losses is given, the best estimate of the loss is accrued. If no best estimate can be made, the
minimum amount is accrued, and the remaining amount is disclosed in a footnote.
 The nature and amount (range) of a loss contingency that is reasonably possible is disclosed in the
footnotes and is not accrued.
 Remote contingencies are generally ignored. Remote contingencies that are guarantees must be
disclosed.
Premiums and Warranties
 Premiums and warranties are loss contingencies that are generally accrued by the entity as the
expected amounts are probable and can be reasonably estimated.
Module 3—Long-Term Liabilities
Time Value of Money
 Review the time value of money formulas and examples in the text.
Long-Term Liabilities
 Long-term liabilities are probable sacrifices of economic benefits associated with present obligations
that are not payable within the current operating cycle or reported year, whichever is greater.
FAR 4 Unit Outline
3
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Notes Payable
 Notes payable (contractual rights to pay money at a fixed or determinable rate) must be recorded at
present value at the date of issuance.
 If a note is noninterest bearing or the interest rate is unreasonable (usually below market), the value
of the note must be determined by imputing the market rate of the note and by using the effective
interest method.
Debt Covenants
 Creditors use debt covenants in lending agreements to protect their interest by limiting or prohibiting
the actions of debtors that might negatively affect the positions of the creditor.
 When debt covenants are violated, the debtor is in "technical default," and the creditor can demand
repayment. Most of the time, concessions are negotiated and real default, as opposed to technical
default, is avoided.
Module 4—Bonds: Part 1
Introduction to Bonds Payable
 Bonds (payable) are long-term debt instruments issued by an entity. Debentures are unsecured
bonds. Zero coupon bonds are bonds sold with no stated interest but rather at a deep discount and
redeemed at face value without periodic interest payments.
Bonds Payable vs. Notes Payable
 Review the chart in the text that compares bonds (payable) with notes (payable) attributes.
Overview of Bond Terms
 Typically, the face value of individual bonds is $1,000. Interest at the coupon rate may be payable
annually or semiannually and bond prices are quoted as 100 (percent of face value). The market will
adjust the price paid for the bonds to reflect the market interest rate or effective interest rate.
Accounting for the Issuance of Bonds
 A bond selling price is the sum of the present value of the total face value of the bond plus the
present value of future interest payments, both discounted at the effective (market) interest rate.
When the bond coupon rate exceeds the market rate, the bond will sell at a premium. If the bond
coupon rate is below the market, the market will adjust, and the bond will sell at a discount.
 An unamortized discount or premium is a component of the carrying value of a bond. The carrying
value is the face value at the maturity of the bond, and it is used to calculate the interest expense
when using the effective interest method of premium/discount amortization.
 Bond issue costs are deducted from the carrying value of the liability and amortized using the
effective interest method.
Module 5—Bonds: Part 2
Bond Amortization Methods
 Bonds can be issued for more or less than their face amounts. If sold above 100 percent of face
value, the excess is a premium. If sold below 100, the difference is a discount. Premiums and
discounts result from market interest rate fluctuation between the time the bond is printed and when it
is actually issued, and they are amortized to interest expense using the straight-line or effective
interest method. (U.S. GAAP allows the straight-line method if the difference between the two
methods is immaterial.)
FAR 4 Unit Outline
4
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
 Under the straight-line method, interest expense is calculated as follows:
Period
amortization =
Premium/discount and bond issuance
Number of periods the bond is outstanding
Interest expense = (Face value × Stated interest rate) – Premium amortization
Or:
+ Discount and bond issuance cost amortization
 Under the effective interest method, interest expense is calculated as follows:
Interest expense = Carrying value at the beginning of the period × Effective (market) interest rate
Bonds Issued Between Interest Dates
 When bonds are issued between interest payment dates, the selling price includes the accrued
interest to date.
Year-End Bond Interest Accrual
 Interest is accrued at year-end from the last interest payment date.
Disclosure Requirements
 Companies with many outstanding debt issues often report only one balance sheet total, which is
supported by comments and schedules in the accompanying notes.
Module 6—Troubled Debt Restructuring and Extinguishment
Troubled Debt Restructuring
 A troubled debt restructuring generally involves a creditor granting concessions to a debtor, which
would not be likely under normal circumstances in order to increase the likelihood of collection. The
debtor will recognize a gain for the excess of the carrying amount of the payable (including accrued
interest) over the fair value of the assets given up. An ordinary gain or loss may result from the
difference between the fair value (FV) and the net book value (NBV) of the asset transferred.
Restructuring may involve a combination of asset transfer, equity transfer, and modification of terms.
 If an equity interest is transferred, there may be a gain to the extent that the FV of the equity
transferred exceeds the face of the payable.
 If there is a modification of terms, the debtor does not change the carrying amount of the debt unless
it exceeds the total future cash payments specified under the new terms.
 From the creditor's standpoint, these loans are treated as impaired if it is probable that the creditor
will be unable to collect the amounts due under the original contract. Bad debt expense (and a
corresponding allowance for credit losses) may be recorded by the creditor when there is a
modification of terms associated with the impairment.
Extinguishment of Debt
 Corporations issuing bonds may call or retire them prior to maturity. Callable bonds can be retired
after a certain date at a stated price. Refundable bonds allow an existing issue to be retired and
replaced with a new issue at a lower interest rate.
 A liability cannot be derecognized in the financial statements until it has been extinguished. A liability
is considered extinguished if the debtor pays or the debtor is legally released.
FAR 4 Unit Outline
5
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Module 7—Lessee Accounting
Overview
 A lease is a contractual agreement between a lessor, who conveys the right to use real or personal
property (an asset), and a lessee, who agrees to pay consideration for this right over a specified time.
 Once the determination is made that a contract is or contains a lease, the lessee must assess
whether multiple contracts should be combined and, if applicable, determine whether separate lease
components within the contracts should be combined or separated from any related nonlease
components.
Lease Classification as Operating or Finance
 Under U.S. GAAP, if any one of the five listed (OWNES) criteria is met, the lease will be classified as
a finance lease by the lessee.
• Ownership is transferred to the lessee at the end of the lease.
• A written purchase option exists (purchase option < estimated fair value).
• The present value of the minimum lease payments is ≥ ninety (90) percent of the fair value of the
leased property.
• The lease term is ≥ 75 percent of the asset's economic life.
• The asset is specialized such that it will not have an expected alternative use to the lessor when
the lease term ends.
 If none of the above criteria are met, it should be treated as an operating lease by the lessee.
Calculating Leases
 When calculating leases, parties must determine the lease term, lease payments, and the appropriate
discount rate.
Lessee Accounting
 If the lease is an operating lease, the balance sheet will reflect a right-of-use (ROU) asset and lease
liability, and both will be amortized over the life of the lease using the effective interest method. On
the income statement, lease expense will be recognized each year of the lease term using the
straight-line method for expense measurement.
 If the lease is a finance lease, the lessee will recognize both an ROU asset and a corresponding
liability on its balance sheet. Unlike with operating leases, the amortization of the ROU asset for a
finance lease will be expensed based on how the entity recognizes amortization expense on
similar assets.
 Lessees can make an accounting policy election and choose not to recognize ROU assets and lease
liabilities for leases with terms of 12 months or less.
Disclosures
 Lessees are required to make qualitative and quantitative disclosures regarding leases.
FAR 5 Unit Outline
1
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
FAR 5
Unit Outline
Module 1—Financial Instruments
Financial Instruments Overview
 Financial assets include cash, ownership interests (stocks, partnerships, LLCs), rights to receive cash
or financial instruments, or exchanges such as derivatives contracts with potentially favorable terms.
Financial liabilities represent obligations to deliver cash or other financial instruments or exchanges
(including derivatives contracts) with potentially unfavorable terms.
Investments in Debt Securities
 Debt securities include investments such as bonds, government securities, commercial paper,
redeemable preferred stock, and convertible debt.
 Under U.S. GAAP, there are three debt securities portfolio classifications: trading, available-for-sale,
and held-to-maturity.
• Trading securities are intended for active trading. The portfolio itself is carried at cost and is
reported at fair value in the financial statements through the use of a valuation account.
Unrealized gains or losses are reported on the income statement.
• Available-for-sale (AFS) securities are carried at cost and are reported at fair value in the financial
statements through the use of a valuation account. A credit loss should be reported for the
amount by which amortized cost exceeds fair value, with any remaining unrealized loss or any
unrealized gains to be reported in other comprehensive income (the "U" in the PUFI mnemonic).
• Held-to-maturity (HTM) securities are appropriate when the investor has the ability and intent to
hold to maturity. The investment itself is reported in the financial statements at amortized cost. If it
is probable that all amounts due (principal and interest) will not be collected, the investment
should be reported at the present value of the principal and interest expected to be collected. A
credit loss (equal to the difference between amortized cost and the present value of expected
collections) and allowance must be recognized.
 Realized gains/losses are recognized in net income when a debt security is sold and HTM and AFS
securities are impaired (per the rules above).
Investments in Equity Securities
 Equity securities include investments such as common and preferred stock, rights to acquire shares
of stock (warrants, stock rights, call options), and rights to dispose of shares of stock (put options).
 Equity securities are typically carried at fair value through net income (FVTNI), with unrealized
gains/losses included in earnings.
 For equity investments that do not have a readily determinable fair value, the practicability exception
allows an entity to measure an investment at cost, plus/minus observable price changes of identical
or similar investments, less impairment.
 Realized gains/losses equal to the sale price relative to the adjusted cost are booked on the income
statement.
Disclosures
 Under U.S. GAAP, entities must disclose concentrations of credit risk arising from all financial
instruments, whether from a single party or a group of parties engaged in similar activities that have
similar economic characteristics. This disclosure is required by all firms except "small" private firms
(assets < $100 million and no derivatives). Market risk disclosure of financial instruments is
encouraged but not required under U.S. GAAP.
FAR 5 Unit Outline
2
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Module 2—Equity Method
When to Use the Equity Method
 The equity method is used to account for investments if significant influence can be exercised by the
investor over the investee. Ownership of 20 to 50 percent of the voting stock of another investee
company is presumed significant influence (with exceptions).
Equity Method Accounting
 Record the investment at cost. Generally, dividends received from the investee reduce the investment
account, and the investor "picks up" its share of the investee's earnings by increasing the investment
account and recognizing the earnings on its income statement. Under the equity method, the
investment account is similar to a bank account.
 Differences between the price paid for an investment and the book value of the investee's net assets
are allocated first to the FMV of assets and then to goodwill. Excess fixed asset FMV is depreciated;
the excess value of land and goodwill is not amortized.
Comparison of Fair Value and Equity Methods
 Be familiar with the diagram in the text comparing fair value and equity methods.
Transition to the Equity Method
 When significant influence is obtained in a step-by-step acquisition, the equity method is applied
prospectively by adding the cost of the additional investment to the carrying value of the original
investment. If the investment was previously accounted for as an available-for-sale security, the
holding gains and losses in other comprehensive income are recognized in earnings.
Module 3—Consolidated Financial Statements
Basic Consolidation Concepts
 Under the voting interest model, consolidated financial statements are prepared when a parentsubsidiary
relationship has been formed. An investor is considered to have parent-subsidiary status
when control over an investee is established or more than 50 percent of the voting stock of the
investee has been acquired.
 Business combinations that do not establish 100 percent ownership of a subsidiary by a parent
company result in a portion of the subsidiary's equity (net assets) being attributable to noncontrolling
shareholders.
Application of the Acquisition Method
 Under the acquisition method, the acquiring corporation records the following during consolidation
(CAR IN BIG mnemonic):
• CAR—The common stock, additional paid-in capital, and retained earnings of the subsidiary are
eliminated.
• I—The parent company's investment in the subsidiary is eliminated.
• N—Noncontrolling interest is created if the parent owns less than 100 percent of the subsidiary.
• B—100 percent of the net assets (assets and liabilities) of the subsidiary (regardless of the
percentage acquired) are recorded at fair value.
• I—Identifiable intangible assets of the subsidiary are recorded at fair value.
• G—If there is an excess of the acquisition cost plus noncontrolling interest over the fair value of
the subsidiary, then the excess is recorded as goodwill. If the acquisition cost is less than the fair
value of 100 percent of the underlying assets acquired, then the balance sheet and identifiable
intangible assets are still adjusted to fair value, and the negative balance is recorded as a gain.
FAR 5 Unit Outline
3
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Consolidated Workpaper Eliminating Journal Entry
 Review the year-end consolidated workpaper eliminating journal entry in the text.
Eliminating Intercompany Transactions
 Eliminate 100 percent, regardless of whether there is a noncontrolling interest.
 Eliminate all intercompany accounts. For example, simple income statement eliminations include
interest revenue and interest expense, and simple balance sheet eliminations include interest
receivable and interest payable.
Commonly Tested Intercompany Transactions
 Intercompany inventory transactions require the elimination of intercompany sales, intercompany cost
of goods sold, and any intercompany profit on the inventory transactions. The elimination of
intercompany profit is allocated between the purchaser's ending inventory and the cost of goods sold.
 Intercompany bond transactions require the elimination of the bonds payable account from the
issuer's balance sheet, and the investment in bonds account from the balance sheet of the investor.
Do not assume that the issuer sold these bonds directly to the investor.
 Intercompany transactions involving land require an elimination making the consolidated financial
statements look as though the transaction had never occurred. Put the land account back to the value
that had been in the seller's books and eliminate the gain/loss.
 Intercompany transactions involving depreciable assets involve essentially the same steps as for land
but with two complications. There is an accumulated depreciation account that has to be put back
where it was at the time of the intercompany transaction, and depreciation expense after the sale
must be adjusted back to what it would have been had the transaction never occurred.
Preparing Consolidated Financial Statements
 Review the exercises in the text that give an example of the preparation of consolidated eliminating
journal entries and the preparation of consolidated financial statements.
Illustrative Consolidated Financial Statements
 The consolidated balance sheet includes 100 percent of the parent's and subsidiary's assets
and liabilities (after eliminating intercompany transactions) but does not include the subsidiary's
equity. Noncontrolling interest is presented as part of equity, separately from the equity of the
parent company.
 The consolidated income statement includes 100 percent of the parent's revenues and expenses and
all of the subsidiary's revenues and expenses after the date of acquisition. The subsidiary's preacquisition
revenues and expenses are not included in the consolidated income statement.
 The statement of consolidated comprehensive income should show, separately, consolidated
comprehensive income, comprehensive income attributable to the noncontrolling interest, and
comprehensive income attributable to the parent company.
 Because noncontrolling interest is part of the equity of the consolidated group, it is presented in the
statement of changes in equity. The consolidated statement of changes in equity should present a
reconciliation of the beginning-of-period and end-of-period carrying amount of total equity, equity
attributable to the parent, and equity attributable to the noncontrolling interest.
 The preparation of the consolidated statement of cash flows in the period of acquisition is complicated
by the fact that the prior year's financial statements reflect parent-only balances, and the year-end
financial statements reflect consolidated balances. The following steps are necessary to prepare a
consolidated statement of cash flows in the period of acquisition:
• The net cash spent or received in the acquisition must be reported in the investing section of the
statement of cash flows.
FAR 5 Unit Outline
4
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
• The assets and liabilities of the subsidiary on the acquisition date must be added to the parent's
assets and liabilities at the beginning of the year in order to determine the change in cash due to
operating, investing, and financing activities during the period.
Module 4—Partnerships
Admission of a Partner
 Contributions by a partner to a partnership are recorded at fair value less the present value of
liabilities assumed by the partnership.
 Admission of new partners may be accounted for using the exact, bonus, or goodwill method. The
bonus method adjusts the partners' capital accounts for any difference, the goodwill method adjusts
the assets (goodwill), and the existing partners' capital accounts for the difference. No adjustment is
required to the partners' capital accounts under the exact method.
Profit and Loss Distribution
 Income or loss is distributed among the partners in accordance with their agreement, and in the
absence of an agreement, all partners share equally, irrespective of what their capital accounts reflect
or the amount of time each partner spends on partnership affairs.
Withdrawal of a Partner
 Withdrawals of partners also use the bonus and goodwill methods.
Liquidation of a Partnership
 When a partnership is liquidated, assets are sold, gains or losses are allocated to the partnership,
liabilities are paid, and the partners are entitled to receive the balance in their capital account.
Partners who wind up with debit (overdrawn) balances owe that deficiency to the partnership and the
other partners. If the capital deficiency remains outstanding, the deficiency must be absorbed by the
remaining partners.
Module 5—Statement of Cash Flows
Overview
 This statement comprises three sections:
• Cash Flows from Operating Activities (CFO): Cash receipts and disbursements from transactions
reported on the income statement and current assets and liabilities. Cash flows related to current
notes payable and the current portion of long-term debt are reported as financing cash flows.
• Cash Flows from Investing Activities (CFI): Cash receipts and disbursements from non-current
assets.
• Cash Flows from Financing Activities (CFF): Cash receipts and disbursements from debt
(including non-current liabilities) and equity.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
 Cash equivalents (treated as cash) are debt securities with an original maturity date of three
months or less.
Methods of Presenting the Statement of Cash Flows
 Under the indirect method, the operating activities section adjusts net income to cash provided, or
used, by operating activities. Adjustments to net income include Current assets and liabilities, Losses
and gains, Amortization and depreciation, and Deferred items (CLAD).
 When the indirect method is used, a supplemental disclosure of cash paid for interest and income
taxes is required.
FAR 5 Unit Outline
5
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Sections of the Formal Statement
 The candidate should be familiar with how individual transactions affect the operating activities,
investing activities, or financing activities of an entity's statement of cash flows. Review the summary
table in the text for individual transaction classifications.
 A disclosure of noncash investing and financing activities is required.
Module 6—Income Taxes: Part 1
Overview
 GAAP and tax accounting rules differ considerably. Some of the differences are permanent because
they never reverse. Other differences are temporary because they involve mere timing differences
between the financial and tax accounting rules.
 Only temporary differences cause deferred tax consequences.
 Tax expense is subdivided into two components: current tax expense (CTE) and deferred tax
expense (DTE).
 Current tax expense (CTE) is merely the result of multiplying taxable income from the tax return by
the tax rate. The exam routinely ignores estimated tax payments by firms.
 The deferred tax account(s) in the balance sheet must be adjusted at the end of each year to reflect
the appropriate amount of deferred tax liability (DTL) and/or the appropriate amount of a deferred tax
asset (DTA).
Permanent Differences
 Permanent differences, such as tax-exempt interest on municipal bonds or life insurance premiums
when the corporation is beneficiary, are embedded in tax law and will not reverse in the future;
therefore, they only affect current tax paid and not the deferred tax accounts.
Temporary Differences
 Temporary differences will "turn around" in the future and are part of the deferred tax calculations.
GAAP requires accrual accounting, and tax law treats some items on a cash basis: e.g., estimated
liabilities or bad debt expense.
 When an item is recognized for book purposes before it is deductible for tax purposes, a deferred tax
asset (DTA) will result. Using straight-line depreciation for the books and MACRS for tax purposes
will result in lower taxable income in the early years of the asset life and a deferred tax liability (DTL).
 DRAs and DTLs must be recalculated each year based on enacted tax rates in the year(s) in which
the taxable item is expected to be realized (DTA) or paid (DTL).
 If it is more likely than not that all or part of a deferred tax asset will not be realized, a valuation
allowance must be set up to reduce the asset.
Module 7—Income Taxes: Part 2
Uncertain Tax Positions
 An uncertain tax position represents some level of uncertainty regarding the sustainability of a
particular tax position by a company. U.S. GAAP requires a more-likely-than-not level of confidence
before reflecting a tax benefit in a company's financial statements.
Enacted Tax Rate
 Because the measurement of deferred taxes is based on the applicable tax rate, it requires that a
company use the enacted tax rate expected to apply to taxable items (temporary differences) in the
periods the taxable item is expected to be paid (liability) or realized (asset).
FAR 5 Unit Outline
6
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Treatment of and Adjustment for Changes
 The liability method requires that the deferred tax account balance (asset or liability) be adjusted
when the tax rates change.
 A change in circumstances that causes a change in judgment about the ability to realize the related
deferred tax asset in future years (valuation allowance) should be recognized in income from
continuing operations in the period of the change.
Balance Sheet Presentation
 Under U.S. GAAP, all deferred tax assets and liabilities are reported as a non-current amount on the
balance sheet.
Operating Losses
 A net operating loss (NOL) occurs when tax-deductible expenses exceed taxable revenues. Taxable
income and financial accounting income will differ for the years in which the loss is incurred and
carried back/forward.
 NOLs arising in the 2018, 2019, or 2020 tax years can be carried back five years and carried forward
indefinitely. A taxpayer can elect to forgo the carryback and just carry forward.
 NOLs arising in 2021 and beyond cannot be carried back but can be carried forward indefinitely.
NOLs carried forward to taxable years beginning in 2021 or later are limited to 80 percent of taxable
income before the NOL deduction.
Investee's Undistributed Earnings
 Undistributed earnings of an investee are presumed to be distributed in the future and are a
temporary difference.
Income Tax Disclosures
 The components of a net deferred tax liability or asset should be disclosed. Additionally, the amount
of income tax expense (or benefit) allocated to continuing operations and the amounts separately
allocated to other items must be disclosed.
Corporation Tax Summary
 The candidate should review the corporation tax summary in the text.
FAR 6 Unit Outline
1
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
FAR 6
Unit Outline
Module 1—Not-for-Profit Financial Reporting: Part 1
Introduction to Not-for-Profit Accounting
 Not-for-profit entities frequently depend significantly on donations or contributions. These entities
include health care organizations (e.g., hospitals), educational institutions (e.g., universities),
voluntary health and welfare organizations (e.g., United Way), and other nongovernmental, not-forprofit
entities (e.g., museums).
 All these entities use the full accrual basis of accounting.
Not-for-Profit Financial Reporting Standards
 The accounting rules for these entities come from the FASB Accounting Standards Codification® (ASC).
 The required financial statements include the statement of financial position, statement of activities,
and statement of cash flows.
 Not-for-profit organizations must report information about the relationships between functional and
natural expense classifications in one location. Not-for-profits may report this information (1) on the
face of the statement of activities, (2) as a schedule in the notes to the financial statements, or (3) in a
separate financial statement (no specific title provided by the FASB).
Statement of Financial Position
 Net assets are composed of two elements:
• Net assets without donor restrictions (no external restrictions)
• Net assets with donor restrictions (external restrictions either in perpetuity or which can be
satisfied with time or use requirements)
 Know that internal board-designated funds are classified as net assets without donor restrictions.
 When a donor-imposed restriction is satisfied, the amount ceases to be classified as net assets with
donor restrictions and is reclassified to net assets without donor restrictions.
Statement of Activities
 There are three required elements in the statement of activities:
• Change in total net assets
• Change in net assets without donor restrictions
• Change in net assets with donor restrictions
 Program services represent the major activities of the organization performed in furtherance of
the organization's mission. Support services represent administration-type functions within the
organization.
 Combined costs need to be allocated between program and support services using any
reasonable means.
FAR 6 Unit Outline
2
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Module 2—Not-for-Profit Financial Reporting: Part 2
Statement of Cash Flows
 In the statement of cash flows (SOCF), transactions are classified in a manner consistent with
commercial accounting. There are three SOCF classifications, including operating activities,
investing activities, and financing activities, with direct or indirect presentation allowed for
reporting operating activities.
 Contributions of revenue without donor restrictions that are board-designated for future construction
or the purchase of long-lived assets are classified as an operating activity on the SOCF.
Module 3—Not-for-Profit Revenue Recognition
Revenue From Exchange Transactions
 An exchange transaction is one in which the not-for-profit organization earns resources in exchange
for a service performed. Revenues from not-for-profit exchange transactions are recognized when
they are realized or realizable and earned. Revenues from exchange transactions are classified as
revenue without donor restrictions.
Contributions Received
 A contribution is defined as an unconditional transfer of cash or assets (collection is certain) to a new
owner (title passes) in a manner that is voluntary (the donor is under no obligation to donate) and
nonreciprocal (the donor gets nothing in exchange). Contributions may include cash, services, and
other assets.
 Unconditional promises (pledges) are recorded as revenues for the portion considered collectible
after treating the entity's estimate of uncollectibility as an allowance for uncollectible accounts.
Conditional promises are not recognized as revenue until the condition has been satisfied.
 Donated services are only recognized as revenue and an equal and offsetting expense some of the
time. The donated service must generally be a specialized service, otherwise needed, measured
easily, or enhance the value of a nonfinancial asset.
 Donated collection items are subject to the same rules as for governments (e.g., capitalized at fair
value); however, this is optional if the collection is exhibited, preserved, and proceeds of any sale are
to be used to acquire other assets for the collection.
 Donated materials (if deemed significant) increase assets and support (revenues) at fair value at the
time of the donation.
Accounting for Promises to Contribute and Other Support Transactions
 Donor-imposed restrictions limit the use of contributed assets. They are recognized as revenues,
gains, and other support in the period received and as assets, decreases of liabilities, or expenses,
depending on the form of the benefits received.
Fundraising
 When a not-for-profit organization offers premiums (e.g., calendars, coffee mugs, tote bags, etc.) to
donors as part of a fundraising campaign, the cost of the premiums is classified as a fundraising
expense. Generally, the difference between the contribution made by the donor and the fair value of
any premiums transferred is classified as contribution revenue.
FAR 6 Unit Outline
3
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Industry-Specific Revenue Recognition
 Special revenue recognition rules for NFP educational institutions:
• Tuition revenues are recorded at gross amounts. Gross revenue from tuition and fees is
determined by subtracting canceled classes from assessed student tuition and fees.
• Any price breaks given to students, such as scholarships or tuition waivers, may be treated as an
allowance that reduces revenues or as an expense.
 Special revenue recognition rules for NFP health care organizations:
• Patient service revenues are recorded at gross amounts but displayed on the statement of
activities net of deductions.
• Charitable services (charity care or other deep discounts that are generally provided based on
poverty guidelines) are not recorded as revenues because there was no intention to collect.
• Bad debt expense may be treated as either an expense (with no effect on revenue) or as a
deduction from revenue depending on whether the organization assessed the quality or
collectibility of the related patient account receivable.
• Other operating revenue includes donated supplies/equipment, cafeteria revenue, parking fees,
and gift shop revenue.
• Nonoperating revenue includes all unrestricted gifts and donations plus donated services.
Module 4—Not-for-Profit Transfers of Assets and Other Accounting Issues
Transfers of Assets to a Not-for-Profit Organization or Charitable Trust
That Raises or Holds Contributions for Others
 An important issue in not-for-profit accounting is the accounting for asset transfers to other not-forprofit
organizations, such as foundations, and the circumstances under which those transfers should
be accounted for as (1) a contribution, (2) a liability, or (3) a change in interest in net assets.
 Financially interrelated organizations are defined as organizations related by both of the following
characteristics:
• One organization has the ability to influence the operating and financial decisions of the other.
• One organization has an ongoing economic interest in the net assets of the other.
 A not-for-profit is a recipient entity (such as a foundation) when it accepts assets from a resource
provider (such as a donor or other benefactor) and agrees to use the assets on behalf of, or transfer
the assets (and/or the return on the assets) to, a specified beneficiary (such as a university). The
accounting by the recipient entity depends on whether the recipient has variance power and whether
the recipient and the beneficiary are financially interrelated.
 Specified beneficiaries recognize their rights to assets held by the recipient unless the recipient is
explicitly granted variance power. Rights, when recognized, will be recorded as a receivable and
contribution, a beneficial interest, or a change in interest in the net assets of the recipient.
FAR 6 Unit Outline
4
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Other Accounting Issues
 The following pertain to financial instruments:
• All debt securities and those equity securities that have readily determinable fair values are
measured at fair value in the statement of financial position.
• Realized and unrealized gains and losses on investments are reported in the statement of
activities as increases or decreases in unrestricted net assets unless the use of the investment is
restricted, either temporarily or permanently, by explicit donor stipulations or by law.
• Gains and losses that are limited to specific uses by donor stipulations may be reported as
increases in unrestricted net assets if the stipulations are met in the same reporting period in
which the gains and income are recognized.
• Investment returns are reported net of any related investment expense.
 An underwater endowment is a donor-restricted endowment fund for which the fair value of the fund
at the reporting date is less than either the original gift amount or the amount required to be
maintained by the donor or by a law that extends donor restrictions. Underwater endowment funds
will report accumulated losses together with the endowment fund in net assets with donor restrictions
and will be accompanied by specific disclosures.
Module 5—Governmental Accounting Overview
Governmental Accounting and Reporting Concepts
 Fund accounting enables service- and mission-driven organizations to easily monitor and report
compliance with spending purposes (fund restrictions), spending limits (budget), and other fiscal
accountability objectives.
Industries That Use Governmental Accounting and Reporting Principles
 While state and local governments will, by definition, use governmental accounting, other entities
such as hospitals or universities may also use governmental accounting and reporting. Not-for-profit
organizations not run by governments (e.g., some hospitals, some universities, voluntary health and
welfare organizations, and research organizations) do not use governmental accounting and
reporting principles.
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles for Governmental Entities
 Standards for government accounting are established by the Governmental Accounting Standards
Board (GASB).
Key Concepts in Governmental Accounting and Reporting
 Funds are separate, independent, self-balancing sets of accounts, similar to a "checkbook." The three
major categories of funds are governmental (GRaSPP), proprietary (SE), and fiduciary (CIPPOE).
 GASB 34 (as amended) establishes the minimum reporting requirements for governments, including
both fund-based and government-wide financial statement presentations supported by notes to the
financial statements and required supplementary information.
FAR 6 Unit Outline
5
© Becker Professional Education Corporation. All rights reserved.
Module 6—Governmental Fund Structure and Fund Accounting
Fund Structure
 Governmental funds use the modified accrual basis of accounting. The five governmental (GRaSPP)
funds are the general, special revenue, debt service, capital projects, and permanent funds.
 Proprietary (SE) funds use full accrual accounting. The internal service and enterprise funds are the
two proprietary funds. Proprietary fund accounting is similar to commercial accounting.
 Fiduciary (trust) funds use full accrual accounting. The "CIPPOE" funds are custodial, investment
trust, private purpose, and pension and other employee benefit funds.
Fund Accounting
 The modified accrual basis of accounting is used with the current financial resources measurement
focus. It is a blend of accrual and cash basis accounting concepts.
 The full accrual basis of accounting is used with the economic resources measurement focus. It is
identical to the accrual basis used in commercial enterprises.